Now that I've talked about
some of the parallel processing
concepts, let's dive deeper
into an overview of Java's
parallelism frameworks.
And we'll see that there's
a number of parallelism
frameworks that are
actually supported
by Java, whose
purpose, of course,
is to make things run more
efficiently, more higher
throughput, higher
scalability, and lower latency.
One of the [INAUDIBLE]
type of approaches
we're going to talk about here
is called the fork-join pool,
which is an object-oriented
framework that
appeared in Java 7.
There are also several
other frameworks that
appeared in Java 8 and beyond.
One of which is the
parallel streams framework,
which is a so-called synchronous
functional framework that
basically wraps
functional programming
facade around fork-join pools.
And then the third
parallelism framework
we're going to
discuss in this course
is the completable
futures framework,
which is a reactive and
asynchronous functional
programming framework.
We're going to talk about all
three of these frameworks just
a bit here.
And of course, we'll
go through them
in much more detail
later in the course.
The fork-join pool framework
was first introduced in Java 7.
It provides a high performance,
fine grained task execution
model that emphasizes
so-called data parallelism.
The basic idea there is that
you have a common task that's
performed and that task then
runs in parallel on the data
elements.
The fork-join pool model
supports parallel programming
by solving problems using the
classic divide and conquer
model.
In this model, the way it works
is you have an overall problem
to solve.
And if the problem
is small enough,
you simply directly solve it
synchronously and sequentially.
However, if the
problem is larger,
then the first thing you do
is you split the problem up
into separate independent
parts, fork new subtasks
to solve each part in parallel.
As those finish running, you
join the subtasks together,
and compose the results
from the subtasks
to create a single
reduced result.
So that's basically the
way that the fork-join pool
model is designed to work.
Under the hood, as we'll talk
about in much detail later,
the fork-join pool
enables something
called work stealing,
which is designed
to optimize multicore
processor performance.
And basically, the
essence of this approach
is to ensure that as long
as there is work to be done,
that work will be done,
and the threads that
are running in the
pool of threads
will not have to block without
having something to work on.
Java 8, then, added to
new parallelism frameworks
that leveraged the functional
programming features
that were added to Java 8.
The first framework we're
going to be covering
is the parallel
streams framework.
And this framework takes
a stream of data elements,
and it breaks it up into
substreams, or chunks.
And these substreams or chunks
can then be run independently,
and they'll be processed in
different processor cores
by the fork-join pool,
and then they'll be
combined into a reduced result.
And one of the nice
things about this model
is that the chunks of
data in the substreams
are automatically mapped to
multiple threads and cores
without the user
having to know anything
about threading,
or partitioning,
or combining, and so on.
So it's all done
behind the scenes
by the parallel
streams framework.
As we mentioned earlier, the
parallel streams framework
leverages the fork-join
pool framework
we talked about before.
And in particular, it
leverages a singleton instance
of the fork-join
pool framework called
the common fork-join pool.
And we'll talk a lot more
later about properties
of the common fork-join pool.
It's really quite fascinating.
Parallel streams, therefore,
provides programmers
with a fine grained data
parallelism approach based
on functional programming.
So it basically wraps a
functional programming facade
around the fork-join pool.
The second model of
parallelism added in Java 8
is something called
completable futures.
The completable futures model
supports dependent actions
that are triggered when
asynchronous operations
complete.
So in this model,
asynchronous operations run.
And the operations run in
parallel in thread pools.
And as the operations complete,
the underlying completable
futures framework
will then arrange
to dispatch dependent actions
known as completion stage
methods.
And these methods
then go ahead and do
additional work, which itself
typically runs asynchronously.
So in steady state,
you have lots
of asynchronous jobs running
in the various types of thread
pulls.
Java completable futures
and streams can actually
be combined to good effects.
So a not uncommon
way of doing things
is to take a sequential
stream and then
have it run the
various behaviors
in the stream in
parallel asynchronously,
using Java completable futures.
And we'll talk
about many examples
of this later in the course.
Some of the great things
about all these different Java
parallelism frameworks is
that they often eliminate
the use of synchronization
or explicit threading
when developing parallel apps.
And by doing this, this
model, this approach
alleviates many accidental
and inherent complexities
of parallel programming.
Because the frameworks
are doing these low level
details for you, and you can
focus on the computations
you need to do to carry out
your overall application tasks.
As I've mentioned several
times, both the parallel
streams framework and the
completable futures framework
can use the underlying fork-join
pool framework by default.
For parallel
streams, you're stuck
with the common fork-join pool.
With completable
futures, you can
select other types
of thread pools,
either predefined thread pools
like fixed size thread pools,
or cached thread
pools, or thread pools
you might define
yourself using the thread
mechanisms available in the
Java executive framework.